# A-Plausible-Regulatory-Framework-for-Individualized-Therapies-Targeting-Specific-Genetic-Conditions:

# Key words: gene therapy, genetic condition, individualized therapy, precision medicine, genetic disorder, in vivo treatment, genetic engineering technology 

Recent advances in genome sequencing technologies involve the rise of long-read technologies (eg PacBio HiFi, Oxford Nanopore) and ultra-high-throughput short-read systems (eg Illumina NovaSeq X). These developments enable significantly lower costs (per genome), increased accuracy, real-time portability, and the ability to resolve complex structural variations. Besides cost reduction and high-quality assemblies, recent advances in genome sequencing technologies significantly contribute towards clinical applications including expansion in situ sequencing, single-cell sequencing, and epigenetic profiling.3,4,5 
This necessitates a regulatory framework for individualized therapies targeting specific genetic conditions. Currently, the draft guidance proposed by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) entitled ‘General Considerations for the Use of New Approach Methodologies in Drug Development Guidance for Industry’ is relevant for the drug development process. However, this guidance does not consider the use of individualized therapy or precision medicine for the drug development process. Moreover, the use of sequencing technologies for the development of therapies (drugs, biologics) is detailed in the draft guidance by the FDA entitled ‘Considerations for the use of the Plausible Mechanism Framework to Develop Individualized Therapies that Target Specific Genetic Conditions with Known Biological Cause’.1,2 
Once again, there appears to be a gap while considering the existing regulatory framework in comparison to recent arising industry practices. For instance, organ-on-a-chip technology is a new approach methodology combining microfluidics with human tissue engineering to model organ physiology, which, when paired with sequencing (e.g., RNA-Seq), may enable high-fidelity, real-time analysis of gene expression and drug responses.5 
Hence, this topic is immensely important and relevant to the regulatory affairs due to current advancements in industry involving the application of gene therapy, individualized therapy, or precision medicine and its implications for in vivo treatment for genetic disorders. My academic background in biotechnology and interest in emerging technologies (sequencing, software, and new approach methodologies) is relevant for my selection of this topic to contribute towards potential suggestions for an appropriate regulatory framework for individualized therapies targeting specific genetic conditions.1,2 

# Primary Sources: 

1. (2026, March 19). General Considerations for the Use of NAMs in Drug Development. United States Food and Drug Administration. https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/general-considerations-use-new-approach-methodologies-drug-development 

Summary: The purpose of the draft guidance titled “General Considerations for the Use of New Approach Methodologies (NAMs) in Drug Development” by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is to provide drug developers with a validation framework for new approach methodologies (NAMs) used in drug development to improve predictive toxicology in humans. This approach aligns with the effort of the FDA to move away from reliance on animal testing. In the draft guidance, the terms “drug” and “drug product” refer to human drug and biological products regulated by the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER) unless otherwise specified. This guidance specifically involves the validation of NAMs (for drug development) as a process by which the accuracy, reliability, and relevance of a procedure is established for a specific context of use (COU). Application to Topic: The topic highlighting New Approach Methodologies (NAMs) is foundational for my presentation to formulate a plausible regulatory framework for individualized therapies targeting specific genetic conditions considering the nonclinical aspect. 

2. (2020, November 24). Qualification Process for Drug Development Tools Guidance for Industry and FDA Staff. United States Food and Drug Administration. https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/qualification-process-drug-development-tools-guidance-industry-and-fda-staff 
3. (2026, March 11). Drug Development Tool (DDT) Qualification Programs. United States 
Food and Drug Administration. https://www.fda.gov/drugs/development-approval-process 
drugs/drug-development-tool-ddt-qualification-programs 

Summary: This guidance by the FDA for a qualification process for Drug Development Tools (DDTs) and Context of Use (COU) statements is in alignment with the Section 3011(c)(2) of the 21st Century Cures Act. DDTs are methods, materials, or measures that have the potential to facilitate drug development. Biomarkers used to establish clinical trial enrichment, clinical outcome assessments (COAs) used to evaluate clinical benefit, and animal models used for efficacy testing of medical countermeasures are all examples of DDTs. The COU statement identifies the specific use of the DDT in drug development. Qualification is the determination that a DDT and its proposed context of use (COU) may be relied upon to have a specific interpretation and application in drug development and regulatory review. The Biomarkers, EndpointS, and other Tools (BEST) glossary as a taxonomy for classifying and developing biomarkers and other DDT-related scientific concepts is also mentioned in the guidance. Application to Topic: Non-animal models, or new approach methodologies (NAMs) involve an alternative approach towards drug development, involving both non-clinical and clinical methodologies. To formulate a plausible regulatory framework for individualized therapies targeting specific genetic conditions, it is necessary to consider both aspects in the qualification process for drug development tools (apart from validation) and their context of use. The BEST glossary is particularly relevant in this context. 

4. (2019). Regenerative Medicine Advanced Therapy Designation. United States Food and Drug Administration. https://www.fda.gov/vaccines-blood-biologics/cellular-gene-therapy-products/regenerative-medicine-advanced-therapy-designation 
5. (2019). Expedited Programs for Regenerative Medicine Therapies for Serious Conditions. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/expedited-programs-regenerative-medicine-therapies-serious-conditions 
6. (2019). Fast Track, Breakthrough Therapy, Accelerated Approval, Priority Review. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. https://www.fda.gov/patients/learn-about-drug-and-device-approvals/fast-track-breakthrough-therapy-accelerated-approval-priority-review 

Summary: The abovementioned sources reveal the cases in which a “drug” is eligible for regenerative medicine advanced therapy (RMAT) designation based on Section 3033 of the 21st Century Cures Act. Furthermore, there is reference to the Guidance for Industry, Expedited Programs for Regenerative Medicine Therapies for Serious Conditions. As mentioned on the website, and not the guidance document, the request for RMAT designation may be made concurrently with the submission of an Investigational New Drug (IND) application. Regenerative medicine, a rapidly expanding field, is the term used for treatment of serious conditions, particularly in patients with unmet medical needs. As mentioned in the abovementioned sources, this guidance provides sponsors engaged in the development of regenerative medicine therapies for serious or life-threatening diseases or conditions. Furthermore, the existence of regulatory pathways including fast track, breakthrough therapy, accelerated approval, and priority review must certainly be considered. In the guidance, the use of the accelerated approval pathway has been mentioned, leading to the consideration of surrogate endpoints while formulating regenerative medicine therapies for serious conditions. Finally, it must certainly be considered that the fast track pathway requires preliminary nonclinical/clinical potential. The breakthrough regulatory pathway demands early clinical efficacy. The accelerated regulatory approval focuses on surrogate endpoints in later trials. Priority review requires evidence demonstrating that a drug provides a significant improvement in safety or effectiveness for a serious condition compared to existing treatments (as applicable to specific genetic conditions). Application to Topic: To formulate a plausible regulatory framework for individualized therapies targeting specific genetic conditions, one must certainly consider all these regulatory pathways. However, it is not necessary that specific genetic conditions might be “serious”. Once again, this leads one to consider all the abovementioned regulatory pathways (based on the amount of clinical/ non-clinical data) required.  

7. (2026, February 25). Considerations for the use of the Plausible Mechanism Framework to Develop Individualized Therapies that Target Specific Genetic Conditions with Known Biological Cause. United States Food and Drug Administration. https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/considerations-use-plausible-mechanism-framework-develop-individualized-therapies-target-specific 

‌Summary: The purpose of this guidance is to describe considerations for generating substantial evidence of effectiveness and evidence of safety for individualized therapies based on a plausible mechanism framework as proposed by the Office of Therapeutic Products in the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER) and the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER) at the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). The terms “therapy” or “therapies” in the guidance refer to human drugs and therapeutic biological products unless otherwise indicated. Individualized therapies are therapies that target a specific pathophysiologic abnormality serving as the root cause of a disease. The plausible regulatory mechanism/ framework outlines a set of recommendations to help developers of individualized therapies generate sufficient clinical safety and efficacy data to demonstrate that a therapy is safe and effective for the intended use, and that the product can be manufactured to regulatory quality standards. Furthermore, the guidance proposes that nonclinical data supporting sufficient editing or target engagement may justify initiation of treatment in humans and may also provide confirmatory evidence. Specifically, the guidance discusses genome editing (GE) and RNA-based therapies. Application to Topic: Although typical therapeutic development programs may not be feasible for individualized therapies in a very small number of patients, it may still be possible to generate data to establish safety and provide substantial evidence of effectiveness to support the marketing approval of the product under existing regulatory approval pathways. The FDA encourages the use of appropriate NAMs in these cases. This considers the nonclinical aspects for developing individualized therapies targeting specific genetic conditions. 

8. (2022, September 19). Medical Device Development Tools (MDDT). United States Food and Drug Administration. https://www.fda.gov/medical-devices/medical-device-development-tools-mddt 
9. (2023, July 17). Qualification of Medical Device Development Tools. United States Food and Drug Administration. https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/qualification-medical-device-development-tools 

Summary: The FDA guidance titled “Qualification of Medical Device Development Tools” provides a voluntary qualification program for medical device development tools (MDDTs) to evaluate devices subject to regulation by Center for Devices and Radiological Health (CDRH), facilitating the development and timely evaluation of medical devices by providing a more efficient and predictable means for collecting the necessary information to support regulatory submissions and associated decision-making. A Medical Device Development Tool (MDDT) is a scientifically substantiated method, material, or measurement used to assess the safety, effectiveness, or performance of a medical device qualified for use in device evaluation and to support regulatory decision-making within a specified context of use. Examples of MDDTs as proposed by the FDA include biomarker tests, clinician-reported outcome measures, patient-reported outcome measures, or non-clinical assessment models such as animal or computational models, and digital health technologies like sensors or wearables. Application to Topic: This guidance by the FDA officially debuts the term “Biomarker Test" (BT) as a test or instrument used to detect or measure a biomarker. Considering Non-clinical Assessment Models (NAMs) and Clinical Outcome Assessments (COAs) as alternative categories of MDDTs, and the consideration of the Biomarkers, EndpointS, and other Tools (BEST) glossary (as introduced above), this guidance is necessary to formulate a plausible regulatory framework for individualized therapies targeting specific genetic conditions. 

10. Victoria E.J.M. Palasantzas, Tamargo-Rubio, I., Le, K., Slager, J., Cisca Wijmenga, Jonkers, I., Kumar, V., Fu, J., & Sebo Withoff. (2023, April). iPSC-derived organ-on-a-chip models for personalized human genetics and pharmacogenomics studies. Trends in Genetics, 39(4), 268–284. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tig.2023.01.002 

Summary: In the review by Palasantaz et al., the technology behind organ-on-a-chip (OoC) platforms and examples of how OoCs platforms may be used for disease modeling and pharmacogenetic research is elaborated. Although genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have correlated hundreds of genetic variants with complex genetic diseases and drug efficacy, functional characterization of these factors remains challenging, particularly because of the lack of human model systems. Molecular and nanotechnological advances, in particular the ability to generate patient-specific PSC lines, differentiate them into diverse cell types, and seed and combine them on microfluidic chips, have led to the establishment of organ-on-a-chip (OoC) platforms that recapitulate organ biology. OoC technology thus provides unique personalized platforms for studying the effects of host genetics and environmental factors on organ physiology. Application to Topic: Since GWAS have correlated hundreds of genetic variants with complex genetic diseases and drug efficacy, functional characterization of these factors may be further explored using organ-on-a-chip (OoC) platforms, integrating both clinical and non-clinical approaches to formulate a plausible regulatory framework for individualized therapies targeting specific genetic conditions. OoC platforms may be further considered as NAMs for the development of such therapies. 

# Secondary Sources: 

11. Hao Zhu. (2025, January 3). M15 General Principles for Model-Informed Drug Development. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/m15-general-principles-model-informed-drug-development 
12. (2023, November 16). Assessing the Credibility of Computational Modeling and Simulation in Medical Device Submissions. United States Food and Drug Administration. https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-documents/assessing-credibility-computational-modeling-and-simulation-medical-device-submissions 
13. (2018). Workflow for Assessing the Credibility of Patient-Specific Modeling in Medical Device Software. United States Food and Drug Administration. https://cdrh-rst.fda.gov/workflow-assessing-credibility-patient-specific-modeling-medical-device-software 
14. (2024, September 16). Sequencing Technologies. PacBio. https://www.pacb.com/technology/ 
15. (2026). Advances using DRAGEN secondary analysis. Illumina, Inc.  https://www.illumina.com/products/by-type/informatics-products/dragen-secondary-analysis.html 

Summary: The ICH M15 Guideline by the International Council for Harmonization of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use provides a harmonized framework for Model-Informed Drug Development (MIDD), establishing global standards for how computational modeling and simulation (M&S) should be planned, evaluated, and documented for regulatory decision-making for medicinal products (eg small molecule drugs, biologics). Furthermore, the guidance by the Center for Devices and Radiological Health (CDRH) titled “Assessing the Credibility of Computational Modeling and Simulation in Medical Device Submissions” also provides a high-level framework for assessing the credibility of computational modeling and simulation (for medical devices). However, there is a need for examples of how to use these guidance documents for specific types of models such as patient-specific models (PSMs). Patient-specific models are computational models that have been personalized using data from a patient. The workflow presented in the Regulatory Submission Tool Catalog is intended for PSM developers to collect evidence supporting the credibility of PSMs for inclusion in a regulatory submission. Furthermore, one may consider the sequencing technologies and genomic analysis pipelines as available for use in clinical and non-clinical or research environments. Application to Topic: All the abovementioned considerations are extremely important for the development of a regulatory framework for individualized therapies targeting specific genetic conditions. Particularly, in silico (computer-based) NAMs involving Artificial Intelligence (AI), Machine Learning (ML), QSAR (Quantitative Structure-Activity Relationship), and PBPK (Physiologically Based Pharmacokinetic) modeling might be considered here apart from in vitro and in chemico based models. Furthermore, their implementation in vivo for the development of individualized therapies targeting specific genetic conditions of known and unknown genetic causes (as opposed to solely known genetic causes) is certainly plausible.  


# Outline for Presentation:

Slide 1: Why A Plausible Regulatory Framework for Individualized Therapies Targeting Specific Genetic Conditions? - 2 minutes 
The FDA Guidance for the Considerations for the use of the Plausible Mechanism Framework to Develop Individualized Therapies that Target Specific Genetic Conditions with Known Biological Cause 
Genome editing (GE) and RNA-based therapies  
What about Genetic Conditions with Unknown Biological Causes, i.e. complex, multifactorial, or undiagnosed rare diseases? 

Slide 2: Currently Existing Regulatory Frameworks to Consider – 2 minutes 
Regenerative Medicine Advanced Therapy Designation 
Expedited Programs for Regenerative Medicine Therapies for Serious Conditions 
Fast Track, Breakthrough Therapy, Accelerated Approval, Priority Review 

Slide 3: General Considerations for the Use of NAMs in Drug Development – 2 minutes 
What are New Approach Methodologies (NAMs) or Non-clinical Assessment Models? 
How are they relevant for drug development? 
Which “therapies” or “medicinal products” should we consider? 
The FDA Guidance for the General Considerations for the Use of NAMs in Drug Development.  

Slide 4: iPSC-derived Organ-on-a-chip Models for Personalized Human Genetics and Pharmacogenomics Studies - An Example – 2 minutes 
Is an iPSC-derived Organ-on-a-chip Model is a Non-clinical Assessment Model? 
How is it relevant for personalized human genetics and pharmacogenomics studies? 
What are genome-wide associated studies (GWAS)? 
Are we considering Known or Unknown Biological Causes? 
What about the potential for integration of sequencing technologies? Organ-on-a-Chip: A new paradigm for drug development  

Slide 5: Key/Relevant Points to Consider – 1.5 minute 
Qualification Process for Drug Development Tools Guidance for Industry and FDA Staff 
Biomarkers 
Context of Use (COU) statements 
Clinical Trial Enrichment and Clinical Outcome Assessments (COAs) 
Animal Models 
Drug Development Tools 
The Biomarkers, EndpointS, and other Tools (BEST) glossary 
Qualification of Medical Device Development Tools (MDDTs) Guidance for Industry and FDA Staff and “Biomarker Test” 

Slide 6: Sequencing Technologies – 1.5 minute 
Which are the currently existing sequencing technologies? Clinical or non-clinical? 
Considerations for devising an appropriate regulatory framework involving individualized therapies targeting genetic conditions of known versus unknown biological cause 
Which are the platforms related to sequencing technologies - DRAGEN secondary analysis as an example?  

Slide 7: What’s Next? - 1 minute 
Assessing the Credibility of Computational Modeling and Simulation in Medical Device Submissions 
M15 General Principles for Model-Informed Drug Development 
Workflow for Assessing the Credibility of Patient-Specific Modeling in Medical Device Software 
